In this episode,
>> we can just continue uh that story
when it comes to u higher order, you
know, or more I think what I was like to
say more complex
um
cognitive processes uh that involve
imagination
uh that involve uh memory that involve
uh mathematics, problem solving, and so
forth. We can use similar notions uh
that we can that we use in sort of
thinking about performance. We can use
notions about affordances
for example and think about and people
have started to talk about now about
cognitive affordances.
Um and in the book I suggest yeah we we
use we sometimes use concepts as
affordance an affordance uh to solve a
problem um in the same way that we might
use uh a certain strategy if we're
trying to solve a math problem we would
say well this strategy will afford one
way to solve the problem or I could take
this other way I could you know use a
different practice this in order to
solve the problem. But it seems to me
that um the the way of describing what
we're doing when when we're doing
something like math problem solving is
very similar to uh what we're doing in
terms of
adjusting the environment.
And in some cases when we do math that's
exactly what we're doing. We're we're
using pencil and paper. We're drawing
graphs. This goes back to Charles
Sanders purse his diagram his idea that
diagrams are really a kind of external
um way of thinking um extended mind
ideas that was already there at purse in
that respect. Um so how do we accomplish
this higher order thinking or this more
complex thinking? Uh often times it's
it's a kind of continuous process that
we can relate to manipulating things out
there in the environment or starting to
manipulate concepts in our head so to
speak. Um that that seems very similar.
We we could maybe imagine
you know what we do out here in the
environment. We just kind of imagine
doing it and that helps us to solve
problem. Hey everyone, welcome to my
conversation with philosopher professor
Sha Gallagher who works on phenomenology
and activism and embodied cognitive
science. An activism is a philosophy of
nature initially developed in
theoretical biology and cognitive
science that understands cognition to
arise through organisms dynamically
coupled to the environments which
themselves are in relation to other
systems. For the inactivist, living
beings enact their world. In other
words, we are constantly participating
in a world of meaning while
simultaneously creating the world we're
a part of. Here's Francisco Varela, one
of the founders of the field, explaining
it poignantly. If we go back to what we
were mentioning before,
that knowledge is not as we used to
believe
just an an apprehension of the world out
there where you just fall in and then
you take it in and you make a model,
right? You process the information that
the environment gives you. in fact that
being in a world is a long process of
co-evolution or co-definition between
outside and inside
that means that the question is open of
whether this way of bringing forth a
world as I like to say is unique or
there are multiple ones. Right? For
example, in the laboratory, this is one
of the things that I study is the world
of colors and color vision for a very
good reason, which is that color is a
very beautiful case study for this
multiversality.
Because the way you and I primates see
what we call color is not at all the way
other species see it. You see, it's easy
for human beings to understand that
different cultures have a different view
of what say beauty or justice is. And we
have no problems in accepting that we
live in a multiverse of social
constructs.
What I'm trying to show with with this
research,
not just me, it's a few other people. I
mean this is not just my own trip but
that you can try and attempt to show
with this line of research is that this
multiversality carries on all the way
down to how you feel, how you perceive
that when you see a color
which is identical for all human beings.
There is completely cross-cultural.
Nevertheless, that is proper to humans.
Now the proper cross-cultural comparison
is between humans and birds and fishes.
on insects because each one of these
groups have something that is proper to
call color vision but is so different
from ours that it cannot be accounted
for as just another view of the same
thing out there is in fact a different
world is in unconventurably different
for example birds happen to have a
different dimension in their color space
now that's a little technical but the
idea is that their colors is as diverse
as ours as we would be to a flat
creature to a creature that has only two
dimensions. The third dimension in space
is inconceivable for a flat creature.
Now birds, mind you, have another
dimension of color. That is, it's not
that they see more colors. It's not that
they see better colors. is that their
color space is unimaginable for us. So
that is again an example of another way
another way of laying down a path for
this stream of of of living things which
then gives them a world which we share.
But at the same time it it cannot be
uniquely assigned as being theirs is the
true one, ours is the false one or vice
versa. It is truly a multiverse.
Now that to me is one of the most
fascinating concepts. I agree because it
says that
when you walk around in the street and I
can see there the pigeons and there is
dogs walking about and we are walking
about and children and dogs happen to
have a very simple color space. They're
dicromats. We are tri chromats and the
birds are probably even pentacroats.
That's dimensionality grows up. Yet you
were we're all walking around the canal
there. We're all sharing
something we can call a common ground.
But this common ground is not something
that it is pre-given. Each one of us has
actually made it into a proper world.
It's a multiversality.
So ground is a very feminine quality of
making something possible
instead of being a very masculine
quality of the out there that you have
to fit into. Professor Gala is a leading
scholar working on the active approach
and has written myriad books on the
topic such as embodied and active
approaches to cognition, action and
interaction and my personal favorite
inactivist interventions.
I hope you enjoy this master class on an
activism after this quick PSA. As you
may know, I've mentioned multiple times
that I'll never have advertisers or
sponsors on this podcast. Frankly, I
think we live in a society of excess and
over consumption and I don't want to
contribute to that by selling you
another product or service that you
probably don't need. That being said
though, and forgive me for the
tortology, we for better or worse live
in the world we live in. I run this
podcast on top of doing a full-time job
while doing research for my masters. And
if I am to sustain this project, I need
some financial backing. So, if you have
the means, please do consider supporting
me on Patreon, Substack, or even PayPal.
All the links will be in the show notes.
And if you're wondering what are the
perks, what are you going to get? The
honest answer is nothing. That's right.
There's no exclusive behind the payw
wall goodies. As far as I'm concerned,
you're simply supporting this project if
you think the already free content
that's always going to be free is of any
value to you. I sincerely do want to
thank the existing supporters and if
you're considering supporting my work,
please do so only if you have the means,
especially in a precarious times. All
right, now to the episode. Yeah, as I
was saying, uh, Professor Gallalagha,
it's an honor to have you on the podcast
and in fact meet you and break that
almost parasocial barrier because I've
been, you know, watching your lectures
and listening to you on other podcasts
for a while. So, it's always a great
experience doing this this gig. Um but
uh as we discuss through our email
correspondences, what I really kind of
want this to be is essentially almost
like a master class uh on an activism
and activist thinking an activist
approach uh and how it pertains to uh
cognitive science and then also as you
mentioned in your in your book an
activist interventions as a philosophy
of nature. Um and but I want to start
off by just asking a very general
question uh for you as a philosopher. Um
could you kind of tell us about your
relationship with the anist approach? I
mean initially u you know you've done a
lot of work on philosophical cognitive
science how did you come across an
activism and then what influence has an
activism had on your own thinking?
>> Yeah. Um okay so I think it goes back
quite a long way uh for me u in my PhD
thesis for example uh I was uh using
phenomenology especially but I was using
the kind of phenomenology that I learned
you know from reading ponti um who was
himself consulting with the empirical
literature so neurology especially and
the psychology of his day developmental
psychology. He was looking at
experiments. And so when I was doing my
PhD work, I also um started to study uh
I took uh PhD um uh seminars in fact in
neuroscience and in uh in physiological
psychology.
I was reading specifically on topics
that related to my uh my thesis which uh
concerned embodiment and temporality.
So uh back then I I think I was in the
sense uh very much inclined to think in
terms of embodied cognition and uh I
started publishing then a few papers
around those themes. Um and then in the
n this was all in the 1980s and in the
1990s
um I I was invited to uh a number of
things that sort of put me in contact
with cognitive science which I really
hadn't considered. I was really narrowly
working I would say within the
phenomenological tradition. Suddenly,
cognitive science uh seemed to be
something I I uh I thought was directly
relevant to the kinds of studies that I
had been doing. Uh and I started to see
that perhaps phenomenology could
contribute something uh in some way uh
to some of the cognitive sciences.
But uh it was only later in the 1990s
that I met Francisco Varela. And once I
I met him and became familiar with his
work. Um that's I think when
uh I was uh pretty convinced about the
inactivist approach. In some sense it
makes in
sense to me because I was working
already sort of along that same line
coming out of the work of Merl Ponti. So
the connection between Mel Ponti and
Varela seemed to me to be you know um a
nice connection that I could make sense
of and that's how I started to get into
the anacist idea.
I'm interested in a bit of a let's call
that a uh sociological question u as it
were. Um so correct me if I'm wrong
here. Varela really in a way was sort of
introducing his ideas of an activism and
you know then later on embodied
cognition and then autoois and whatnot
as sort of to challenge this prevalent
notion of cognitivism that was um you
know prevalent in penicious really in
cognitive science and philosophy of
cognitive science at the time this
notion of you know representations where
there's a entity out there in the world
that your mind creates a representation
of and whatnot. And the thing is, I
mean, for me, I'm again really new to
this whole world. You know, it's only
been in the past few years. And wherever
I looked, yes, there's this debate about
representationism and, you know, against
non-representationalism
and whatnot. But I I I don't see the
cognitivist approach really in many
places anymore. Even if I do see
cognitivism, it is some like I would
call that like a light vanilla
cognitivism
uh or like a yeah maybe like a with some
kind of embodiment into it. So you know
this is in other words a simple way of
me asking uh have the tides have have
have the thing have the what's how does
the saying go? Have the tides shifted or
anyway have things changed uh since
since the time with Varilla and you know
that crew kind of introduced this this
notion where it seems like uh
cognitivism is really out of fashion.
>> Well um I would like to say yes to that
except that I always meet people who are
not quite convinced yet about embodied
cognition or an active film. Uh and so
in some way I would say it really
depends on who you talk to and um there
are certainly still plenty of people who
are on board with the cognitivist
program um in in philosophy in science
and in a variety of sciences including u
things like economics for example and I
think that uh
it might and I've read just recently you
know a paper of a PhD student who who is
basically
taking the same kind of cognitivist uh
approach to explaining um something like
social cognition. So I don't think
cognitivism is dead. I don't think that
we've won a battle or anything like
that. Um I do think that a lot more
people however are considering the idea
that uh embodiment has something to do
with cognition and uh some some of those
are looking uh at the activist approach.
And so
I find that in a number of disciplines
or or we might say in in terms of
applications there are a lot of people
in other disciplines than philosophy
coming and looking at what the
philosophers are saying about an
activism or what the cognitive
scientists are saying about an activism
they are trying to apply those ideas. So
if you start looking at the literature
it looks like yeah exact and activism is
really expanding uh you know going from
one discipline to another and so forth
and being very successful. Um so I think
there is something like that going on
but at the same time uh there are uh
definitely
um people who are not yet convinced and
that might be the fault of the
inactivists because I think in some way
we haven't really provided anything
anything like a knockdown argument
against the notion of representation for
example. It's always possible, it seems
to me, to to develop an account of
cognition in representationalist terms.
It makes perfect sense, you know, given,
you know, you're if you're working in
that tradition. Um, so there's always
that kind of response to the inactivists
and the inactivists, I think, have to
work harder to perhaps convince people.
But this is something like a
a transition or a uh a transformation
that
maybe is generational. It has it takes a
while. It takes a long time to to work
itself into um uh our thinking about uh
our ways of doing science.
>> Fascinating. Yeah. Thank you for
>> I hope that makes sense. No, it it did.
It did. It did. I mean, obviously, this
is not like something you can answer off
the back of your head like it probably
requires some kind of social science
where you I don't know, survey people
working in cognitive science and ask
them these questions. It probably could
be measured empirically. Um but I mean
the reason I asked that was cuz yeah I
mean even in my own university
department like whenever I talk to
people who are either doing PhDs or in
fact professors and you know associate
associate professors whenever we have
this discussion there's always some
notion of yes some of them may even be
representationalists.
However they do take this notion of
embodiment and kind of this relationship
between the body and our environment
quite seriously. It's not this almost
cartesian, you know, abstract kind of
the cojito uh kind of way way of
thinking. Uh but yeah, that's very very
interesting and I'm I'm this is again
why I really do still feel uh that it's
a a fledgling field despite it being
introduced in the 1990s and even earlier
with like phenomenology and whatnot. Um
excellent. All right. So given that
we've kind of got that bit of that
interesting history of activism out of
the way, let's just for the listener
here, can you uh just simply simply put
uh outline what is an activism?
>> Yeah. So I think one way to start
thinking about an activism is uh
something it shares with a number of
other approaches which emphasize uh the
fact that uh we we should not just think
of cognition totally in terms of brain
processes.
uh we should rather think of a brain,
body and environment as um a kind of
system
and the important aspects here are the
way these
these things like brains, bodies and
environments are coupled. Um and one uh
in in that respect the enactus takes a
dynamical systems approach um which
basically says something like this. If
you if you change one of those things,
if you if you go in and you start
messing about with the brain, then all
of the dynamics start to change the
dynamical relationship between uh brain
and body and between body and
environment. But in a similar way, if
you if you go and start
changing intervening in some way on
bodily processes, you could also change
brain and environmental
our experience of the environment. And
if you start changing the physical
environment um you also get some kind of
changes in brain and body. So the these
um these things are are linked in a very
intricate intertwined way so that if you
change one you're going to change in a
certain way the coupling the
relationality and I think that's part of
what activism emphasizes the
relationality of the s in the system. Um
it's a little bit tricky with the
environment because you can think of the
environment as something just physical.
Um but coming from a more
phenomenological perspective, one can
think of the environment as the lived
environment or the experienced
environment which is not just the
physical
uh stuff out there but also uh is
involved with social and cultural
processes.
and practices. So the environment uh is
is one thing that uh is somewhat complex
in terms of how we ought to think of it.
And if we if we're thinking along this
line of brain, body, environment,
then
how we define the mind as an embodied
mind is just in terms of those coupling
processes. And
to the extent that those coupling
processes depend on body and brain and
environment. So at least uh that that
might be a very broad way of talking
here. Uh but I I think definitely the
inactivists are working within that
framework. I'm trying to spell out uh
some of the details of how that must
work. And this is uh not an easy uh kind
of thing to do especially given that uh
there is already an established
vocabulary and the inactivists are in
some way trying to develop their own
vocabulary
um and there one can only try to make um
you know one's thinking more precise as
as you go along. Um this of course also
involves looking at the empirical work
experiments and so forth trying to make
precise what we mean by something like
an affordance uh or something like being
attuned to the environment. These are
like
different kinds of of terms that we're
using to describe this. And I think we
we have to become more precise in terms
of what those terms mean.
Indeed, indeed. And I think it's ongoing
work as a matter of fact. Um, so I
really want to see if I can we can flesh
out in this case you really can flesh
out this notion of it being a philosophy
of nature. Now again for me as someone
of an novice or neopight to this whole
field I always thought of an activism uh
in relation to neuroscience and
cognitive science. Um in fact for me it
very much came off as like a scientific
theory because all the material that I
read are always referring to like um
some kind of know scientific work some
kind of scientific study. So it's very
much uh you know in fact Varela himself
was a scientist um he was a biologist
and a neuroscientist
um but then in your book in in activist
interventions you argue that it's in
fact a philosophy of nature and you use
even use the work of uh Peter Peter
Godfrey Smith the u the Australian
philosopher of science uh to kind of try
and outline your point here. So yeah, uh
could you perhaps flesh out why you
believe and why you claim that an
activism should be thought more as a
philosophy of nature over I'm I'm not
sure if this is really what you're
saying over a scientific theory per se
or well perhaps could it be both?
Yeah, definitely I think it can be both
in some some way. Uh an activist
thinking can inform science and uh you
you can think of it as already doing
that in some of the programs that uh
have been developed by people like
Varela. So the idea of neuro
phenomenology as you say he was a
biologist a neurobiologist and uh he did
real experiments neuro phenomenology uh
was at least one of the approaches that
he used uh to try to develop his
inactivist thinking. Um there are other
you know I've uh proposed something
called front-loaded phenomenology which
is just a slight variation on uh on you
know how we can use something like
phenomenology in doing
experience. Um but uh those are I think
ways that inactivism uh can can sort of
contribute to uh the science
and so in that sense I think it can
inform a scientific agenda.
The idea of
an activism as a philosophy of nature
which I suggested really is not
something that s sort of is a a separate
idea. Um it's very closely tied to uh
the question of how you think of doing
science
uh in a kind of naturalistic fashion of
course and what naturalism means what
nature means within that framework. So
this is a a question actually that goes
back again to Merlo Ponti in his very
first book the structure of behavior.
He uh he talked about the notion of
nature and the idea that we maybe have
to rethink the whole concept of nature.
You know what what exactly do we mean by
nature? And of course if we just take a
a kind kind of scientific naturalism and
and you say well we think of nature as
this kind of objective thing out there
that we are trying to study and
manipulating so that it it sort of gives
up its secrets and so forth. That kind
of objectivist conception of nature is
the type of thing that Meloponti was
trying to rethink. Um and if if we start
to think along the inactivist way uh of
uh enacting
our environments and uh uh basically our
our nature of being embodied as itself
being part of nature. Um then again with
Merlo Ponti this is a different way of
thinking about nature from the kind of
scientific naturalism of objectifying
nature. So um that to me that sort of
suggests that we could think of an
activism as a rethinking of how we do
science as a rethinking of the mind also
as a rethinking of what we mean by
nature to what extent nature is uh what
extent the mind is part of nature and
what what that would mean.
>> Yeah. Brilliant. Brilliant. I I
thoroughly enjoyed reading that part of
the book. And if I may, kind of go on a
bit of a speculative point here. This
this is also why I kind of get annoyed
when I kind of hear like I feel like
sometimes people frame the question the
wrong way where uh yes if you view
nature or the the the the material world
as like this mechanical world in this
cartesian sense and all coming from
someone like Francis Bacon sure then
probably uh it does problematize this
kind of inactivist way of thinking and
then that's when people suddenly leap
into things like idealism and they're
like okay we you know the nature it's
just it's all mind everything is mind or
something like and for me that's like
kind of like if I may put it a bit
crudely loose kind of thinking where
it's like you haven't even clearly
defined the the the axioms or the
framework to how you're asking these
questions and I what I appreciate about
an activism is and correct me if I'm
wrong here so uh Ezekiel de Paulo that
the person who wrote the book the
linguistic bodies and fantastic thinker
I really enjoy uh reading and stuff and
he kind of mentions like well an
activism is still very much a
materialist theory. It's something
that's you can you can you can speak of
an activism and you can use an activist
approach while being a materialist
without having any kind of uh ponchon
towards like mysticism or any of this
like new age kind of stuff. It can still
can still speak of the fact that yeah we
live in a in a material world and the
world we live in. uh but of course it
does kind of take uh perhaps
reformulating what we mean by the
material world. So on that note, I am
curious if I could ask you this kind of
speculative question. Where do you stand
in this like very it's a very popular
debate online really, you know,
materialism versus idealism and and all
these really speculative questions like
metaphysical questions really. Um, as an
activist thinker, how do you where do
you find like do you think this debate
is a it's like a useless debate or where
do you sit on this whole debate of, you
know, materialism versus an activist,
sorry, idealism and then I guess pans
psychism and all the other different
isms that come up in this conversation.
>> Yeah, I can I can definitely say I'm not
a psychist. So, it's one one thing I can
be clear about. Um I uh and and I'm not
sure I could sort of outline a set of
reasons why I would why I would go that
way, but uh
the
I mean this this really does tie in to
to just those uh those questions about
nature that we were we were talking and
what what you know we could ask what do
we mean by the material world?
Certainly
it's a physical world that we have to
deal with. We are physical creatures. We
have bodies.
Bodies are sort of playing a you know an
important role in our ability to think
about the world and to engage in action
in that world. So we are in a certain
sense part of that material world and uh
that's that's a good starting point. Uh
but at the same time we seem to
well I'm going to use a term that is a
little tricky uh but actually uh Ponti
said this about language. He said that
language
language in some way transcends the
body. Um and it's not that he meant that
uh it leaves the body behind.
Uh but you might uh it might be better
to think of it as saying that uh
language carries the the body you know
further uh into kind of cultural pract
set of practices
um and communications with others. So if
we start thinking about
our interactions with other people
um not just in terms of language but in
terms of action and the formation of
habits and the formation of social
institutions and there's a lot there to
talk about. Um but if we think in that
those terms then
well are we saying that those are those
are features
that transcend the material world. And I
don't don't actually want to say that
because it sounds like it's a you know
there's something spooky about it but uh
in some way those are in those phenomena
that are tied to uh sociality
uh and to the generation of meaning uh
and so forth. uh those are things that
in a certain way are irreducible just to
purely material processes. Um this is of
course a challenge to try to explain how
um all of this works but uh this is part
of what the inactivists are trying to do
and for example they talk about social
cognition
um and Ezekiel Apollo as you say is
talking about language here. So I think
uh yeah we are trying to say things that
u means we are not naive materialists
at the same time materialism is where we
start and uh uh it's it's I guess how we
would test our ideas as well
>> that makes sense. Yeah, that that that
last bit how you verify your ideas and
test your ideas is really important for
me cuz I mean I guess I take somewhat of
a would constrainian approach to
language where I find especially it yeah
it's it's for a lack of a better term
sexy to talk about pansychism it's you
know it gets people turning that oh
consciousness and all these huge
questions but I find that there's
something even rather narcissistic about
that way of thinking where you think
that the whole universe is something
like the mind. So you kind of enter an
it's a very anthropocentric way of
thinking and what I appreciate about the
activist thinkers and even the kind of
the big thinkers in the field is they
first of all they're very scientifically
oriented and they try to verify their
theories through science and other means
too like social science and whatnot but
also they still and again I mean Ezekiel
Dealo makes this point that the the
difference still lies that there is
something called the material world not
everything is the mind not everything is
an extension ion of your whatever
consciousness experience or whatever
it's there's still a difference but that
difference is perhaps viewed for a lack
of a better term dialectically if I may
say uh but yeah that that was great
thank you for that professor Gala um now
one important of course I want to talk
about phenomenology that's a huge part
of uh kind of the an activist approach
but before that in a couple of places
you did mention the body and I kind of
wanted to see if we could flesh out the
concept of the body as you would
understand it as in the inactivist
approach.
Now, yeah, I mean, yeah, firstly, if I
may just put it really plainly, what is
the body of in the activist approach?
Cuz I mean, I guess if I could say, you
know, there's even things like an
activist robotics, I mean, that's like a
physical, you're trying to give uh a
computational system or some kind of
machine a physical body. And there are
people like Rodney Brooks who's done
like really fascinating work. I I love
love reading about that stuff. But
>> I don't know when I I've read like when
I see for for instance Mo Ponte when he
speaks of the body it's not the physical
body really it's something a bit
different. Um but can you just kind of
Yeah. Again in your view at least when
you speak of the body how do you
conceptualize that that concept that
notion?
>> Yeah. So I think this has to do with u
the connection between inactivism and
phenomenology. So in phenomenology and
in people like Merlov Ponti but even
before him in Huso uh for example and
some of the other phenomenologists you
have this distinction between what they
call the lived body and the objective
body. Um and those are in a certain way
two perspectives on embodiment. Uh it's
not that we have two different bodies or
anything like that, but we could take an
objective perspective on our on our own
body. Uh treating it as almost an
object. Um for example, in a in a
medical examination, that's might be
something that we doing or if we have a
certain pain, we might start to to treat
our body in a in a very objective way.
Um so that's one attitude or one
perspective on the body. But then you
know to be able to even do that we have
to be already living in our body
experiencing our body. So some people
talk about the experience of sort of
being inside the body but I think that's
not the right way to to talk about it.
uh my body is in a certain sense uh uh
co-extensive with me in some fashion and
uh uh that lived body is probably the
notion of a body that plays a role in an
activist view and yet it's something uh
still uh that can be studied from an
objective perspective. So again we might
say the lived body is the you know the
the p the the kind of firsterson
perspective that we take on our own
body. Uh we we experience our body as as
uh you know being our our own body. So
you may have a sense of ownership for
our body. We when we do things we have a
sense of agency for doing those things.
Um, a lot of this has to do with
proprioception, introsception, a lot of
processes that are in fact bodily
processes that can be studied from a a
more objective perspective. So we can do
science and study and we're studying the
same body that we are in a certain way
living. So it's not again as I say it's
not that we have two bodies but we we
can take different perspectives on the
body and uh and uh uh study it in a
number of different ways. So I think
that in the body uh is something that uh
plays a role in cognition and we're
we're asking as an activists exactly how
we can investigate that and and exactly
what are the roles that the body uh
plays and we can do that experimentally.
We can do that by using empirical
science.
This as as well as keeping in mind the
phenomenological perspective of this
being a body that we are in fact
experiencing.
>> Indeed. Indeed. but but also within as
you say you know embedded or situated in
a culture in an environment within a
language and all these other factors
that that that factor into it put it
that way. Um excellent. I I feel like I
should just ask you again this very
basic naive question just to get the
definitions clear.
>> When you say cognition, what do you mean
by that?
>> Yeah. So I think of it uh in terms of
human cognition which is something that
I myself experience as someone who
perceives the world and thinks about
things. Um there's there's a wider let's
say a wider sense of cognition that some
of an activists like to to talk about
where uh cognition means something like
a very basic responding to the
environment. So that even a bacterium
right is cognitive in that very wide
sense. So the extent that we
respond intelligently
where intelligently means relative to
the kind of organism that we are um uh
to the extent that we respond
intelligently to the environment
cognition is there. So that's a very
basic idea of cognition in that in that
sense as people like Evan Thompson would
argue you know bacteria are uh cognitive
in some way. Um my own interest however
is you know although I think animal
cognition is a good topic to look at uh
definitely
have students who work in that area I
think my own interest is in human
cognition that's a very much more
complex uh to me much more challenging
to think of and uh so cognition for me
means primarily that
we're talking about the human sort of
cognition
and that wow that includes certain
traditional categories perception,
imagination, memory, right? All of these
different aspects that we treat under
the bedding of cognition that's all
included there.
Yes, certainly. Certainly. I mean,
again, I think the the big challenge
with humans is this factor that we have
this this annoying thing called culture
and the social and the environment that
that but of course you can make that
argument with animals too. But there's
something a lot more um for lack of a
better term uh complicating uh about
humans or confusing about humans. Um
>> in my in my
>> Yeah, go ahead. I just give you an
example. In my um undergraduate classes,
I sometimes
uh challenge my students to think about
what it would be like to uh you know
experience the world as a frog
experiences it, right? So I say here,
you know, put a frog right here on the
table. What do you think the frog sees?
And I think the usual, you know, thing
uh that uh an undergraduate or anyone
might just say is that well the frog
sees the world that we see. But in fact,
um that seems very unlikely given that
the structure of the frog's eye is
completely different from ours as well
as the structure of the frog's brain and
the structure of the frog's body. It's a
completely different system. So why
should we assume that the frog perceives
the same world that we perceive? So this
is an idea that goes back to the
theoretical biologists like Von Muskll
but it's really sort of inspired by the
contean idea you know the the
distinction between the phenomenal and
the numinal world right so we can say
that the frog lives in a different
phenomenal world than we live in and
this would be also the the the ide in
school the different umbil a different
uh environment in a certain sense
experienced environment and uh and then
we can say well the human lives you know
then in a different world from the frog
and then we can ask the contian question
well which of these worlds is closer to
the way the world really is
and uh we we might be inclined to say of
course the human but that's that's not
quite uh clear Why why would the human
world as we the world as we experience
it with our body and our brain and our
eye structure
have to be closer to the way the world
really is. And you know that that whole
question
becomes something of a
of a challenge for for the students to
try to think through and
>> No doubt. No doubt. I mean
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean personally for me I
feel like it's a perennial problem in
philosophy and and even science because
it touches obviously even how we do
science. Um but I mean it's really
interesting you said that because
obviously the famous paper by Nagel
what's it like to be a bat and he kind
of tries to make this point and then
Wkenstein in fact I'm very much a a wood
conkensteinian where he kind of talks
about yeah even if a lion could speak we
wouldn't understand them and this notion
and and this again is why I am drawn a
lot towards the uh an activist approach
because I don't like these huge
metaphysical questions uh and trying to
like just pause it. Oh, everything is
consciousness, everything in the pants
and whatever. Cuz it's like ah like do
we even have to talk about those things?
Like for me like in in language it's
kind of like what works that's the real
thing at the moment in a very localized
setting. Um and again as you out outline
in like this notion of yeah what is real
that is that that can question which
even who's the real toone and then it's
still going on I feel um yeah excellent
so I'm curious so when you do post that
question to your students generally uh
what kind of interesting uh answers have
you have you gotten?
they uh they are uh you know to to that
precise question of you know which world
is closer to the way things are in
themselves
first of all um
the the immediate response is I don't
know and of course
>> which is probably a good question a good
answer
>> yeah yeah this is the beginning of
philosophy when we can say I don't know
something we want to pursue it and I
tell them also that well I don't have
the right answer to that either
but we should we should continue to
think of it but this ties in I think to
some claims by enactivism which uh talk
about enacting the world um and uh in
some respects people have u have
understood this to be sort of
anti-realist that it's you know we we
somehow rather construct the world uh
And you know, and this runs into sort of
ontological
questions about realism versus
constructivism and so forth. But, uh,
that's that's something that we, you
know, we can start talking about in, you
know, to follow up that kind of
question. You know, what exactly does
our body bring to this? what what does
our body do uh in terms of shaping the
way that we understand or conceive of or
uh perceive the world.
So it gets into a good discussion, but
there's there's no answer uh that really
makes a makes a clear
um definitive definition of of which
which of these worlds is the right one.
>> No doubt. No doubt. Of course. Um yeah.
Excellent. I mean, okay, there's like a
lot more I want to get into. I want to
get into autooasis and then kind of
discuss this this big debate around
representationalism. However, before
that, I'm really interested in um
chapter 3 uh professor of of an activist
interventions where you talk about uh
pragmatism um and and I do find that
there's uh it's it's a rich tradition
now the pragmatic kind of American
pragmatic way of thinking and even
though I haven't done as much reading
into pragmatism as much as I wanted to,
I have read a lot of Whitenstein and
then even Robert Brandon but can you
kind of talk about Yeah. what what you
identified in in the book and then maybe
since you've written the book and your
other work the relationship between
pragmatism the the tradition or the
school of pragmatism if I could say that
um and kind of the activist approach
what are the yeah what are the relations
you see between these two fields
>> yeah so uh in terms of the history of of
this I would I would say that an
activism made
uh good use of phenomenology. Uh so
people like Varela when he was starting
to to think of this was influenced by
people like me panti and even later by
hustro when he he started to work with
other people and started to uh
understand
he also I think was very much influenced
by Drifus but all of that is
phenomenology and I don't think uh
people were were actually talking about
uh
pragmatism until around 20 thou I would
say 2008
when a number of of people started to
publish um about the con possible
connection between pragmatism and
>> activism
>> and uh I think before that uh people
weren't really talking about it and the
inactivists weren't really saying much
about pragmatism
um but it it does make a lot of sense in
terms of Um
the uh to me the similarity uh between
someone like
uh John Dwey and Merlo Ponti I think
there are connections between pragmatism
and phenomenology and that's a way to
sort of start to see connections between
pragmatism and and activism.
So the the uh
work of John Dwey for example uh to me
if once you start reading Dwey you find
a lot of an activist ideas there but you
can go back even further to uh Charles
Sanders purse and find uh that he
himself was uh was really uh talking
about the the role of embodiment the
role of the environment. So that's
that's one thing I I believe that the
pragmatists uh share with the
inactivists a real emphasis upon uh the
role of the environment and our
way we are
coupled to the environment. So the
Buouie for example has this phrase
organism environment uh hyphenated uh
and it seems to me that that's very much
the kind of thing that the inactivists
want to talk about.
Dewey also I think emphasizes
the uh action component of cognition.
You know what is cognition for? Um it
seems to me Dewey would say it's really
about problem solving in a certain
sense. Uh and that means that
cognition is for action
again and an active theme there. So when
you start looking at the details then uh
you you find uh some connections. So
Richard Manari is someone who has done
some work in this area and he has he's
pointed out especially
uh looking at Charles Centers Purus and
his concept of representation which is a
kind of alternative conception uh to the
kind of mainstream cognitive science
conception of representation and
minority suggested this is a something
of use to embodied and an activist
approaches.
Um but uh I think since
I I think uh Manari was one of the the
first to to write about an activism into
cognition
and I think that uh he published around
that time of 2008 and ever since that
time a good number of people have been
pointing out and and exploring uh the
connection here between these two
different
uh traditions.
>> Yeah, I think there's a lot more work to
do as well on this, but uh definitely
it's been it has been uh something
people have explored
>> indeed. I mean in the book um you speak
also of this is something I really
enjoyed reading uh Dewy's notion of
situation.
Yeah, that seems to me to be uh again a
very inactivist idea that the sit situ
what do we calls the situation is not
just the objective environment that
surrounds us but it includes ourselves.
>> Um that is to say
>> exactly
>> the situation is defined by the agent
and the environment. So any change in
the agent changes the situation as much
as any change in the environment uh
changes it.
>> Yeah. So I think there a way to think
think about that close connection
between organism and environment.
>> Indeed. Indeed. I mean at first it kind
of seems a bit like almost like a
contradiction to state but then once you
start seeing in terms of this relational
aspect you got to kind of use a
different framework to view that problem
as it were. and and as you mentioned yes
even Richard memory uh yeah he professor
memory is great he taught philosophy at
our university and I really enjoyed
reading well he's a great uh lecturer
but also I really enjoyed reading his uh
paper mathematical cognition a case of
inculturation and you mentioned you
refered that paper in the book too which
I really do want to discuss that's uh
you the last chapter in the book kind of
abstract thinking uh as it pertains to
an activism great awesome thank you for
uh thank you for that professor all
right so Since we've kind of discussed
the pragmatism, I mean, look, this could
probably be a whole episode just
discussing pragmatism and activism. So,
I don't want to get too uh bogged down
in that. Uh the other big concept of
course that I I have to ask you when we
talk about an activism is uoasis.
This again is like a whole uh theory or
even set of theories on its own uh which
you know relates to many many questions
and all the way from philosophy to
biology to cybernetics and so on. But
yeah can you talk about the concept of
autopois um as Verilla and uh I forgot
his mentor that they developed it uh and
then um how it pertains to um an
activist the activist approach.
Yeah. So, Matana is the uh this mentor.
So, um Matana and Vera worked together.
They were working in Chile. Uh and uh
they were both neurobiologists
and so they were interested,
you know, precisely in biology and the
in sense
definition of life. How should we
conceive of life? And so they proposed
this notion autooasis
which means something like self
prodducing
you quite literally self-producing
the idea that a
um a biological entity cell or a an
organism
is something that selforganizes in such
a way to keep itself going. um that's
what they were trying to uh to work out
in
terms
for Matarana was uh very much a
biological concept and as I understand
it uh Matana wasn't really inclined to
sort of take that concept and apply it
you know more broadly but Varela was he
he thought well this is a concept that
perhaps could be used to uh allow us to
think about cognition as well. So he
wanted to sort of carry that idea from
biology into cognitive science and this
is part of how we get to inactivism.
People
have suggested that uh maybe it's even a
good model uh for uh our understanding
of the social world. Um and and then
that's you know where where one stops
you know using that model is is not
clear but it is a a nice model for the
inactivists.
Ezekiel Depala who you mentioned before
has a role here because one thing he
realized was that in the original theory
of autoasis
there was there was no mention of the
idea of adaptation
that you know exactly the question is
you know how does the organism which is
autoetically
uh maintaining itself how does it relate
to the environment and there was the
idea only that it sort of drew energy
from the environment
in some way. Apollo wanted to say,
"Yeah, but it also responds to the
environment and adapts to the
environment and then we start to think
about
the organism environment relations in
such a way that we get a better story.
So I think uh Depalo has added to the
theory of autooasis in a way that really
helps the inactivist idea uh and
supports this whole notion of um the the
uh body environment uh relationship.
>> Indeed. Yeah. I that's fascinating. I
mean yeah when I came across uis in fact
because I haven't got a background in
biology my head really went into more
like sociology. I mean, I was thinking
of even like a society or I mean
nowadays you could certainly say this
for a corporation. A corporation seems
like it's in this like self recreating
selfro productive kind of way perhaps
more towards the destructive end of
things. Uh and I I find that that quite
interesting too but but yeah there's a
lot to say there. Um so I kind of want
to see if how much we can push the
concept. I mean you say in the book that
an activism is a philosophy of nature.
In the same way can we take the concept
of autooasis and kind of push it to be
some kind of
I don't know philosophy of nature or
even some kind of like neomaterialist
kind of way of thinking about reality as
such or is that probably pushing it a
bit too much?
I think that in some regard this is what
Milo Punki uh was attempting to do in
his later work.
So there's a set of lectures that he
gave um
at I think he gave them at the college
def France or the sbon but there these
are the lectures on nature
and uh there he cites uh some work by
embryologists
who are
uh clearly working on very basic biology
and trying to understand how
embryos
um kind of self-organize
uh how they develop uh and some of the
principles that he was looking at in
their work start to inform his um his
thinking about um well about ontology.
So uh when he's thinking about nature
these very basic processes are sort of
built in to uh natural development in
organisms.
This becomes something of a model for
him when he
last unfinished work, the visible and
the invisible
tries to develop an ontology that goes
along with that. Uh, and this is an
ontology that definitely is unorthodox.
It's not pansychism.
uh but it's it's not your ordinary type
of ontology either of you know objective
nature and uh and so forth. So uh in
some sense I think uh your question is a
good one because I think that uh uh
someone like Marilyn Ponti was already
trying to develop that type of idea. Now
he he did not have the theory of
autocoasis.
Uh but it seems to me that some of the
embryologists who he was reading u did
come close to something like the idea of
self organizing
um aspects of you know embriionic
development. interesting uh to this is
that the embryologists he was reading uh
were uh working in the US uh with John
Dwey. Uh Dwey was one of their mentors
and one of the people they were was
working
with.
They were all working with a
developmental psychologist named Ro
McGraw who is doing a lot of very
interesting
uh work uh experimental work with babies
uh who uh and this I think would have
very much interested neural plate but he
never made the connection that as I say
I don't think he knew of uh murder
McGraw's work uh or that John Dwey was
in in sort hovering in the background.
But uh the the embryologists were
influenced by Dwey and uh and Dwey was
working with them. This was in the 1930s
and this was the material that um yeah
some of the material that uh Ponty was
reading in the early 50s when he was
writing these lectures on nature.
So there's a project there that is
really I think fascinating.
a lot of work could be done on that and
uh yeah so that's uh something I'm I'm
still interested in.
>> No doubt. So just to uh remind me again
professor where does monty write off
this is is it in the phenomenology of
perception or some of his other lectures
on the on nature you said where he talks
of the embryology and whatnot.
>> Yeah this is in lectures on nature
that's the name of the book lectures on
nature.
>> Excellent. I'll I'll pro I'll I'll be
ordering that today. Yeah, it's
fascinating all these connections as you
as you point out. Um yeah, I mean if
only they had uh the internet and and
Twitter before it became a Nazi hell
hole so that they could have connected
online. They would have been amazing to
see what these thinkers would have done
together in in their intersections. Um
>> brilliant. Brilliant. Or
>> also I mean it's a shame that Mera
Pontis smoked too much and he died young
of lung cancer.
>> Correct. Yes. Yes. Yeah. But then who
who didn't
>> he could have Yeah. Right. But he could
have lived another you know 20 years and
maybe met Vela. So that would have been
>> that would have been a fascinating
meeting of Walts. Yeah. Um but then also
who didn't smoke too much back in the
day. So that's a
>> it's a fun little thing.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Correct. Correct. Um
>> yeah. It's funny. Yeah, I was even
telling my partner, I mean, I don't
smoke, but whenever I visit Paris, I'd
like to pretend like I smoke cuz I feel
like smoking there, even though I don't
even like smoking and having my uh my
black coffee. Um, in any case, be that
as it may, uh, all right, the other
topic I want to discuss with you is um
this now I think it's really um getting
a lot of attention with the whole AI
stuff and all of that, this active
inference uh and the free energy
principle. So even in the book you do
touch on there's one section where you
discuss uh the FEP in the chapter
perception without inferences but yeah
through an an activist approach cuz I'm
still trying to see the connections cuz
obviously in many ways I mean one could
say an activism is really a
nonrepresentationalist
model of cognition and a way of thinking
but with active inference I mean it's
really a schema which you can apply I
mean if it's it's predictive coding with
this FAP and in active inference you can
have both. You can even have a
representationalist view but also a some
might argue a dynamic
non-representationalist view but you
know in active inference they use
generative models and whatnot but I mean
where do you see in this debate like
what insights do you think the
inactivist approach may have uh to the
field of uh active inference and kind of
theoretical neuroscience um you know in
in these kind of current discussions
that are ongoing
Yeah, it's a a complicated question and
a number of people have weighed in on
this. So there are some people who are
arguing from the perspective of
predictive processing,
active inference approaches, the energy
principle ideas who are saying uh
actually this is very very much in line
with the the way inactivists think. And
then you have others on the anatical
side including Apollo and Evan Thompson
who are saying no not really. There are
some uh differences that we we have to
be careful about. Um but even they kind
of leave leave it open a bit and I think
that's where it is right now. It's a
kind of open question. The the idea of
active inference is quite uh closer
quite a bit closer to the inactivist
idea than the original kind of
internalist model of predictive
processing that you you get in Yakob
Hoey for example. Um and so I think uh
you know proposes something that is
highly representational, highly
internalist
u and um in in that respect
and fart goes a little bit uh closer to
embodied cognition where Hoey just says
embodied cognition is is off the table.
Clark thinks well this uh this idea can
be put together with extended mind and
embodied cognition at least in that
respect and uh you know Clark is
somewhat in between the inactivists and
the more internalist story right because
he still wants to talk a little bit
about representations
um but the emphasis on active inference
I think is really about
embodied
uh movement,
changing the environment
rather than changing our our model. Um
changing the environment to fit our
model if that's what we have. And uh the
inactivists
take it would take it a little bit
further to say active inference is
really the way to think about uh all of
this predictive uh mind idea and
prediction is not something that is
foreign to the inactivist idea. You have
people who work in embodied cognition
often emphasizing the anticipatory
nature of the of the motor system. Uh
when we are planning our actions and
carrying through and controlling our
action um that is uh really about
predicting
having feedback proped feedback from our
from our bodily movement and so forth.
So there are models there that I think
are quite consistent with the anacuist
view uh and could be consistent with the
the more predictive processing view.
It's it's just really about how far
removed um you can you can get
predictive processing from the more
internalist representationalist story.
How far can you bring it over into the
more academic
here? Uh it's I think it's interesting
that Fristen Carl Fristen who is sort of
the guru of predictive processing free
energy principle and so forth
>> strange principle
>> I I over dinner one night I I said I
have a hypothesis and uh it's that uh
the only thing you really care about is
the mathematics and he said that's
that's true and I I I came to that
because he seemed to be able to write
with to co-author with people like and
with Clark and with the inactivists and
it seems like it that part of it, the
philosophical or psychological part of
it is not the important thing for him.
It's the math. As long as we have the
good math, um then he's happy. Uh and
then it's about how the philosophers
interpret it and that's their problem, I
guess.
>> Indeed. Yeah. I've got a a few things to
say here. Um I spoke to this researcher
called Mel Andrews and their point wrote
a really good paper on the free energy
principle and Mel was comparing Carl
Fristen to more of a Newton than an
Einstein because Einstein was kind of
like a philosopher. He was asking these
fundamental questions whereas Newton
even though he had his esoteric
interests in theology and whatnot when
it came to the science he was just doing
his calculations. he was just a
completely mathematical machine and and
Mel was saying Carl Ferson's more of a
Newton than an Einstein. Um but that's
fascinating but also as you mentioned
cuz I in fact I mean as I do my own
study and research in active inference I
don't even think too much about this
whole representationalism
debate because what really the the re
the way I take the active approach when
it comes to active inference is this
notion of action because um like
especially let's call it you know
juaposing with the current contemporary
LLM based AI kind of paradigm. One one
thing I really appreciate in the
artificial intelligence world when you
introduce this notions of concepts from
active inference is that like
intelligence is not about abstract
computation or abstract kind of
theorizing but it's it involves action
and an agent acting in the world and
where you make predictions and then
there's a discrepancy between what you
observe and then after that you change
your priors and your perceptions as you
get feedback from the world and One
really interesting point um Mahal
Albrasian made who's also an active
inference researcher was she said that
in a way the moment an agent stops
acting the agent just dies like there's
no I mean the the moment an agent um
attempts to uh reduce free energy or
reduce surprise and and when that stops
the agent just that ends that's the end
of the agent's being in the world and I
find that very much an an active concept
in the sense that Like when we think of
an inactive system, it has to be seen in
this like dynamic coupling and the
moment that coupling I guess disappears
so does the the whatever the thing the
agent the system. Um so yeah again as
you say there's a lot we could get into
there but but fascinating and I I I do
appreciate that you say that uh yeah it
can be seen through different lenses
philosophical lenses uh but I I'm
assuming though I mean if I may ask you
probably still do take an active
approach to as to how you view the work
being done in uh FP and active inference
correct
>> yes I'm definitely on that side of
things and u I think I don't think it's
a finished story. I you know I think
there's a lot more work to be done but
uh that's that's the way at this point.
Yeah.
>> Indeed. Fascinating. All right. Uh so on
that note the other question I want to
bring up in fact I have a lot more and I
we'll see how much I can get through
with the time we have. Professor is uh
ecological psychology. And I'm going to
admit right off the bat I I haven't done
a lot of reading with Gib on Gibson's
work. I've just read like Wikipedia
articles really on ecological psychology
uh and whatever I've read with these
notions of affordances and whatn not I
mean like oh this is just like an
activism like I just see all of an
activism and I'm like so in a way what
I'm trying to figure out is in fact
where are the differences between
ecological psychology and the an
activist approach because they seem to
me is just using different language to
speak of the same phenomena
So firstly, yeah, could you kind of just
broadly speaking outline the the the the
the similarities and the relationship
and then if there are any significant
differences, could you also please kind
of maybe flesh them out too between um
an activism and ecological psychology?
>> Yeah, it's definitely the case that the
inactivists borrow quite heavily from
the ecological u psychology tradition.
uh Gibson's work especially and what
they borrow are things like concepts
like affordance uh direct perception
um they they see those work uh they they
work very well with the inactivist idea
um and that makes a lot of sense because
I think Gibson was at least partially
inspired by his reading of Merlo Ponti
Tony Chimero has has made this point and
and so forth. So
it's kind of, you know, they're close
cousins in some way, Gibson, Gibsonian
psychology and in activism. Um but uh it
depends on who you talk to now because
uh there are some uh Gibsonians who uh
basically uh argue that
inactivism and ecological psychology are
not that close that there are some
differences and uh sometimes it's just
uh to me it seems like it's a quibble a
little bit of a quibble um about the
nature of coupling and relationality.
How we understand affordances
uh to the extent that affordances are
relational that seems to be
the way in activists want to think about
it. Um but then there is also maybe a
deeper kind of ontological question
about this what we mentioned before
about realism versus constructivism
right uh for the Gibsonians uh they
would say information actually exists
out there in the environment so the
environment is there already
pre-established in a certain fashion um
and it's that information that somehow
or other comes into play uh in our
cognitive life. Whereas I think the
inactivists
want to you know talk more about the
relationality of this that you know what
what counts as information.
information is not objectively out
there. But what counts as uh uh as
information will depend upon the nature
of the organism, the the the interests
of the perceiver, the background of the
perceiver,
you know, prior experience, his
historicity and so forth. So, um I guess
um there there can be
quibbles uh but there there can be a
kind of deeper disagreement and how to
resolve that would be uh part of an
ongoing uh discussion.
There are a few other things too. Um the
for example the notion of uh resonance
has been used by both u ecological
psychologists and uh in activists where
people they they want to talk about sort
of the
the idea that there's a kind of uh the
brain resonates
as a way of describing what you know how
this coupling happens. Um but
but again a debate about the nature of
resonance seems to be whether whether
it's something like a one-way
uh influence of the
environmental information on what's
happening in the brain or I think the
inactivist would want to say there's a
kind of reciprocity. There's something
like a two-way
process here that we would want to call
resonance
and it's that might well again not quite
sure if that's a kibble or really
fundamental difference
but yeah the these are some of the
differences at least that
the ecological psychologists uh want to
point to and the activists uh I suppose
are trying to work out whether
their conceptions are uh are more
Gibsonian than the Gibsonians.
So I'm not quite sure you know where
that all is going to end up but again
these are like open questions. So in in
all of these cases where you know the
predictive processors are there the the
Gibsonians are there and the inactivists
are trying to
define their position with respect to
those other other uh approaches and uh
that that's that means we're still kind
of have a set of open questions and more
work to do
>> indeed. I I like what you said about the
activists are trying to figure out if
they're more Gibsonian than Gibson
himself. And this is one thing I love
about doing this podcast when I speak to
scholars like yourself who they take a
thinker from the past and they've
studied them pretty much most of their
academic life and then in a way they
become more of that thinker than even
the original thinker itself and so I see
this happen a lot to Malup Ponti Husurel
I mean Husurel I think in fact in a way
I forget where Mul Ponti says this I
read this somewhere um but he he kind of
really saw himself of continuing or
radicalizing Husel's project. Um, so I I
and I I see this happen in philosophy
and even science quite a lot. Um,
fascinating. Uh, excellent. Thank you
for that, professor. Um, so
>> the other really fun chapter I read in
this book. Uh, this is again a huge
question in philosophy and discussed um,
>> yeah, I could even say at noium really
the the question of free will. uh it's
you know some there were some
best-selling books written by uh phil
philosophy popularizers on free will and
whatnot. Um
>> but then yeah you you do in the book u
you do kind of firstly you outline that
you you say firstly
when we think of free will this kind of
neuroscience approach with people like
Libet and his experiments that I think
where we're asking the wrong question
about free will you say that free will
has to do with intentionality and then
you even um yeah in a very systematic
way uh outline this where if there's a a
lizard it in the grass and then you it
touches your feet and then you decide to
catch that lizard. Where does the free
will lie? So, uh anyway, there's a lot
there. So, of course, to the listener, I
mean, I'm not going to go through the
whole chapter here. Read read the book.
Um
uh but I'm I'm uh curious from like an
an activist approach first of all uh
again put plainly how do you how would
you uh perhaps formulate this question
of free will um this huge question of
philosophy coming through the inactivist
approach?
>> Yeah, that's it's a good uh it's a good
question. I think uh in I'm not sure if
I do that in the book or in some paper
someplace
but I I suggest that it might be better
to shift away from the terminology of
free will because it has such a long
history and people yeah
>> yeah a lot of baggage with it. uh and
and
use another term which may also have its
impact but nonetheless uh I I think the
the concept of autonomy uh might be
something more productive to think about
um but uh yeah I do I do really like u
you know thinking about these issues
um and it's one place where uh I've I've
been called a cartisian actually which
is of course
these days it's something like a bit an
insult
>> or at least it's it's meant to be
something like an insult but
>> daycart was a lot richer than you know
we make them out to be but uh
>> no doubt
>> it was actually it was Dennett in a
footner who said uh he thought my view
was right in in terms of thinking that
free will has to be about more than just
those milliseconds that liberty is
describing u and but then he says yeah
but uh the problem is Gallagher thought
consciousness has something to do with
it and that's where he thought I was a
cartisian um but that whole lizard
example I thought was an attempt to say
how consciousness does come in to play u
with uh questions having to do with free
will um because it's you know it takes
time it's uh
You know, some things that are happening
in the brain are happening at one time
scale, but there is a a time scale that
relates to our experience, which goes is
a little bit slower, you might say, or a
little bit more extended. And in that
time frame of our experience and
especially when memory gets into the
game, uh that's where one should look
for free will. And then I think if you
if you really want to sort of change the
terms and start talking about autonomy
uh then I think we also need to talk
even longer time frames or time scales
uh and that would be uh time scales that
allow us to think about social
interactions uh and so forth. So the
notion of autonomy that I like is uh
really u the feminist uh concept. Um
actually one of your professors there
professor McKenzie has done work in this
respect on relational autonomy.
Um and this is I think an idea that says
again is very consistent with the idea
of pragmatism especially in someone like
John Dwey that
we we have to in a certain way achieve
our autonomy. Uh we achieve it through
our interactions with others. uh we we
have a kind of freedom by degree uh
depending upon who we're interacting
with, how we're interacting with people,
the institutional settings within which
we're interacting. Freedom is not an
absolute but it's something that comes
by degree and it depends upon our
interactions with others. Um, so there I
think that's that's a way to tell a
bigger story about the notion of free
will or autonomy.
>> Yeah. No doubt. No doubt. I mean also
like I mean just to just for the
listener going back to this experiment.
So kind of what you put out in the in
the five steps is this notion that okay
you're out somewhere in a field a lizard
touches your foot and then immediately
you have this like non-concious
reaction. Oh something touch touched my
foot. But then afterwards you register
that it's a lizard and then you make the
decision, oh I've got a lizard
collection. I'm going to go and catch
this lizard for my collection. And I I
mean for me I I thought that was a
beautifully beautifully uh outlined
example because like it's for me at
least as a human being just living life
when I think of free will uh or I don't
really I try not to think of free will
much but when I do think of it uh it's
like oh yeah it's this like kind of
intention intentionality to go and catch
the lizard and and when I think of how I
experience my life on a daily basis it's
that I make decisions and I
intentionally uh for better or worse
decide on things and That's where I feel
like I'm a I'm a free agent, an
autonomous free agent. Um, but yeah,
that's fascinating. And also that's a
really good connection. I don't think
you talk of much of maybe you do and
I've just forgotten because I read this
a while back this how much the sociity
and the then social world factors in in
the decisions you make and that's
certainly the case and very an activist
too. Um, excellent.
>> Yeah.
>> Or professor just in Yeah, go ahead.
Sorry.
>> Oh, sorry. This is going to say, yeah,
we can't take the the idea that we are,
you know, totally free agents who are
capable of making decisions, you know,
on our own. So that's that's a very
individualistic conception, I think. Um
and it's it's just that that all gets
balanced once once you start thinking
about sociality and uh institutions and
what you know Bordeaux's notion of for
example
>> and uh I've been working on some of this
stuff looking at notion of sedimentation
where sedimentation has to do with um
you know things that shape our way of
thinking about the world and uh that we
inherit that we we we gain from prior
experience or that we inherit that gets
uh gets instituted uh in institutions
and social practices. And so there's a
lot of stuff going on there that
constrains let's say enables us to to
act in a free way but also constrains
that freedom. So again, we get a degree
of freedom depending upon circumstances
and situations and so forth.
>> Absolutely. And I mean I'll also leave a
link to your paper, your latest one,
habit segmentation and institutions uh
in the show notes. Uh I I was going
through it on the weekend, but I really
didn't have any questions on that per se
cuz I didn't read it that carefully. But
no, I I couldn't agree more man
especially I would say here you you
probably experience this quite a lot
when you travel. In fact, I mean it's
it's just again this is what I love
about phenomenology. It just just pay
attention to your lived experience and
you'll see a lot of the insights,
you know, make sense to you. Uh how much
yeah the factor of the environment plays
into you your most inner what you would
call your most inner private life even.
Um fascinating. All right, Professor,
just in the interest of time, if I may
ask, uh, is it okay if we go over time
by about 10 minutes? 5 to 10 minutes or
>> Sure, that's fine.
>> Excellent. Excellent. Because I I've got
about two to three questions. One really
important, the other two, if we have
time, we'll get to it. Um, yeah, which
is this chapter. So, I would say I mean,
in the past few years, I I too am fully
a
activist. like I've been fully convinced
that there's something to the inactivist
approach and I try to in my own thinking
be it in my work in AI or just you know
my interest in philosophy I try to take
the activist approach but it's chapter
10 this the the only part that I'm still
sort of battling or trying to trying to
really get my head around or wrap my
head around is this this idea of
abstract thinking and then in in this
book in in chapter 10 the Last one uh
the practice of thinking at 10.4 4 you
even talk about doing the math which you
know perhaps this is true is the most
abstract thinking that a human being
does like in terms of especially
advanced mathematics and now I could say
you know my background is in computer
science uh you in theoretical computer
science especially it it is very
abstract but there's still there's still
I don't know if you really push it there
probably is still something embodied in
how you think about even like algorithms
and how you know stepbystep
kind of they go. But I don't know if you
could say the same thing in mathematics.
So anyway, this is a long-winded way of
of me asking,
yeah, how would you explain something
like the notion of abstract thinking uh
through an activist lens?
>> Yeah. So
uh I have I I I this part of what I was
trying to do there and other people have
also
tried to do this and they've taken um
you know different different approaches.
I'm I focus on the notion that
thinking is a kind of practice
um and that uh it's a practice that we
can be skilled in and um that
that skill to me is in a certain way
continuous with embodied processes.
So if you if you look at uh performance
studies and talk about uh skilled
performance right bodily processes are
are very much included in that. Um it's
about how
body and environment
uh you know work together or how you
know what what constitutes a skill you
know in any game or any athletic contest
or any performing arts. It's always
about the environment. It's always about
uh the body and we can we can tell a
story all about that. uh but the idea is
that uh what we find there are certain
practices uh and the idea that I have
practiced doing things u uh in order to
gain skill uh in the performance but I
think uh we can just continue uh that
story
when it comes to u higher order you know
or more I think what I was like to say
more complex
um
cognitive processes uh that involve
imagination uh that involve uh memory
that involve uh mathematics problem
solving and so forth. We can use similar
notions uh that we can that we use in
sort of thinking about performance. We
can use notions about affordances
for example and think about and people
have started to talk about now about
cognitive affordances.
Um and in the book I suggest we we use
we sometimes use concepts as affordance
an affordance to solve a problem. Um in
the same way that we might use a certain
strategy if we're trying to solve a math
problem. And we would say well this
strategy will afford one way to solve
the problem or I could take this other
way. I could you know use a different
practice in order to solve the problem.
But it seems to me that um the the way
of describing what we're doing when when
we're doing something like math problem
solving is very similar to uh what we're
doing in terms of uh
adjusting the environment
and in some cases when we do math that's
exactly what we're doing. We're we're
using pencil and paper. We're drawing
graphs. This goes back to Charles
Sanders purse. His diagram, his idea
that diagrams are really a a kind of
external
um way of thinking. Um extended mind
idea sort of was already there at Purse
in that respect. Um so how do we
accomplish this higher order thinking or
this more complex thinking? Uh
oftentimes it's it's a kind of
continuous process that we can relate to
manipulating things out there in the
environment or starting to manipulate
concepts in our head so to speak. Um
that that seems very similar. We we
could maybe imagine you know what we do
out here in the environment. We just
kind of imagine doing it and that helps
us to solve the problem.
um with the idea of the imagination also
I really like Gilbert Riyle's chapter uh
in the concept of mind uh if you're
familiar with that
uh he has a chapter on imagination where
he says
uh the imagination really is grounded in
yeah bodily practices. So we look at how
children start to imagine and uh they
might imagine in in their play you know
they play at being a bear and he says
well what do they what does that mean to
imagine being a bear? It means the the
child starts nashing its teeth and
growling and you know using claws. uh
it's all about movement and action,
taking action and that's that's where
imagination begins
and all that kind of manipulation that
we do at the beginning uh when we start
to uh to think in a mathematical way
that also ties into movement and bodily
action which Don sort of is the basis
for for
more complex
kinds of thinking. So
that that at least I mean there's a
number you know and I say say a good
number of people who are trying to make
that argument um in the book and uh have
pointed out the connection the close
connection between bodily movement
action solving mathematical problems and
so forth. Uh I think there's an argument
there again it's uh it's one way to to
try to solve that kind of scaling up
problem is usually referred to. Um other
people have said well look let's just
look at the social processes involved um
that you know how do we do our thinking
and uh we can think uh oftentimes with
with other people in conversations
we can solve problems or we can dream up
ideas uh we can discover new concepts by
having a conversation with someone and
something emerges from that that you
know wasn't there before. Um and of
course that's the basis of learning and
so we we can start talking about scaling
up on the basis of the kind of social
interactions that we engage in which are
themselves
bodily gestural you know
all of that kind of
set of practices that we engage in. No
doubt. I mean, in fact, I'm glad you
mentioned uh social processes because I
mean, if I could use an example here,
I'm a software engineer as my day job.
And I would say no doubt like the most
important thing to becoming a good
software engineer is pair programming
where you literally work on a problem
with another engineer or programmer. And
it's it's it's really odd because
there's something almost if I could
romanticize it something almost sublime
that happens where when you're working
on a problem with another person in a
way in a way your mind is in their mind
and their mind is in your mind you know
it it's there's like a synchrony that
takes place um and I I this is what I
always like I've been doing a bit of
mentoring with some uh undergrads and
some junior programmers and I tell them
if I know you can easily use an LLM and
like get some code. But if you're
learning to program, try your best to do
it with others. Do it with other people.
Uh be it your peers or perhaps a senior
engineer. Cuz first of all, if it's a
senior engineer, you will learn things
as you pay program. But also
in like a very fundamental sense,
you you can't think without having some
some affordance from another person or
even literally your computer. You
program on your computer and you think
while you're programming. It's not like
you have the program in your head and
then you go write it. You think while
writing with your computer or while
writing the code. So yeah, there are
some fascinating connections there. I
think I would say if I'm being honest,
Professor Gallagher, the only part I
struggle with is the mathematics bit
because at least I probably have a very
naive understanding of mathematics where
I think oh it's just these genius you
know professors like working on like
abstract computation but even with them
they would of course use a a board or
some kind of physical device to do their
work I assume u for their calculations.
Uh
>> all right. So yeah, go ahead please.
>> I was saying sitting PhD
an economics seminar PhD seminar um and
teach it was beyond me. I mean because
it was highly mathematical but I was
working on a you know master's degree in
economics and I could follow
conceptually what was happening but I
couldn't do the math. This guy, the
teacher, was just up there on the board
and it looked like the mathematics were
in his fingers or coming out of the
truck. It's just this is totally that's
the way they thought, but they were
thinking by writing on the board and and
that was the kind of movement, the kind
of action that they were engaged in. And
it's not clear that they could just sit
still and do that kind of thinking uh in
any kind of prolonged and complex
fashion.
>> Yeah, that's it. I mean, yeah, it takes
a bit of in in a way. I mean, I guess
you would call it a flow state, but when
I've I mean, I do a bit of calculus and
stuff just because I'm for the machine
learning work. Obviously not in any way
as advanced as what they'd be doing in
university. But in a way when you start
interacting with her just like I mean
I've got the my textbook right here or
just working on the thing you get into
like a flow state where you even don't
realize how much of your thinking is
sort of extended out to the world be it
a computer or like a piece of paper. So
it's it's a a really yeah it's really
bizarre phenomena if you just reflect on
it to be honest. Um excellent. All
right. Uh I mean I had a question on
this was there there are two speculative
questions. My last two questions really
but I had a question on maybe you could
just quickly comment on this. I mean if
if it doesn't interest you it's fine.
Just the penultimate question would be
I'm curious when I was reading an
activist and even your book have you
thought of much of like this
neomaterialist metaphysics with people
like Karen Barad and and all of that
like the vitalist philosophy uh when it
comes to I mean even in connection with
like process philosophy of whitehead and
all of that and as an an activist
thinker do you do you find any affinity
with like that kind of thinking when it
comes to matter this notion that you
know this almost the relational aspect
of of matter and of reality itself.
>> Okay. And so some of what you uh were
saying was broken up a little bit
the the internet there but uh I think I
got so it's about process philosophy. Um
yes and white yes definitely I think uh
to me uh that's the sort of implication
of an activism embodied processes I you
know I I find myself using the term
process more and more um and I recently
wrote a paper uh which is Lamrose
Malaphor has got me involved in a
project uh and so the paper is published
in a um arch archaeology journal. Uh but
it's about Whitehead and the notion of
concretence, his notion of concretence
uh in his process philosophy. And uh
this to me uh
was trying to outline a kind of inactive
embodied approach to the the very act of
digging in archaeological digs. uh and I
was using Whitehead's notion of process
there but uh that's a different story
but I I do think that uh yeah uh the
whole notion process is something
important for the activist story and
that's it's that's a good way to to
think about um all of the the various
things that we're trying to say to put
them to try to put them into the kind of
process this um
type of approach. Yeah. I don't know
what to call it, but process possibly.
Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you could
almost like a WH or like even like a
framework to view reality itself and
Yeah. I just Anyway, there's a lot to
get into there too, but u yeah that is
quite interesting because obviously when
I was reading this
dynamic approach between the mind and
then the body and the environment. I
couldn't help but think about some of
process philosophy or even this like
vitalist philosophy that you see with
people like uh Karen Barad and and all
of that. Um excellent. All right, the
last question uh professor and this is a
bit of a perhaps a controversial one and
I thought it'd be a fun note to end on.
It's a bit of a sociopolitical question
and the reason I'm asking this is
because obviously
you know we live in interesting times uh
especially in in your country in the US
and and I was thinking apppropo and
activism I mean you know in our culture
we hear a lot about like the liberal
notion of the individual everything has
to be centered around the individual
right like my in my rights it's about me
you know even when these conversations
about privacy and all of these big
topics. It's all always about the
individual. Um, and yeah, I mean in a
way I too think of because I live in
this world and in my environment I too
very much have an individualistic
approach to how I think of things
although I try to be very careful about
that too. Uh but so let me let me just
ask plainly
um in the an activist approach or using
the an activist lens does it leave space
for something like this the liberal
notion of an individual.
>> That's a good question.
Short answer I think is yes that
we are talking quite frequently about
agents who are embodied agents who are
taking actions
but we uh I think the inactivist wants
to stress that uh that agent is always
within some context some environment in
which uh social
uh practices institutional
structures will have an effect upon the
the agent. So u where should we start on
that story? And there are some uh who
who recommend starting with the social
and working our way back to
uh talking about an individual because
from the very beginning you know from if
we look at the developmental psychology
from the very beginning we are social
creatures. We we are totally immersed.
Uh Mirunty has this phrase he says we
are born into a whirlwind of language.
you know, we we hear even before we're
we're born, uh,
you know, late term fetus can hear the
sounds of its mother's voice and can
recognize its mother's voice. So, there
have been experiments on that. But uh uh
so we're born into
a a social structure and from the very
beginning we're we're being raised in
that social structure for better or for
worse and uh so if we start there then
the question is how do we achieve
individuality
I think that's a better way to start and
then not to start with okay let's start
with the individual and and uh define
the individual in an isolated fashion as
what it is, but rather start with a a
social um beginning and try to see how
the individual wins its autonomy
um you know from its social relations.
>> Yeah, that's beautifully put. I mean I
would even say here where I find deep
affinity with even like the Hegelian
philosophy where in a way the self the
the individual it's something you become
and you become that socially and you
know when Hegel even speaks of like
freedom is like a social freedom um and
I find that yeah I would say yeah I'm
also glad that we still do leave place
for individual because I also don't want
to get into like this like new age kind
of everything is conscious iousness the
self doesn't exist. I mean, I know that
that non-dual thinking, there's a place
for it, but I mean, the way I always
joke around with my partners, it's like,
why is it that if I just walk on the
street and just touch someone's face,
why would they get offended, right? I
mean, if we are all just consciousness,
why can't I just touch someone's face?
But there has to be a bit more of a
yeah, a deeper way of thinking about
that. Um but yeah, that's a good way to
put it. You know, it's like the uh don't
start with the individual like there's a
place for the individual, but then try
to try to figure out how does one become
an individual, you know, with time using
for sure things like developmental
psychology. Um that was lovely. Uh this
has been a a complete privilege. Thank
you so much, Professor Gallagher. I've
learned a lot and uh again I'm when I'm
relisting I'll leave uh resources to all
of the papers and thinkers you mentioned
in the show notes. Uh yeah this has been
truly truly an honor. Thank thanks a lot
for your time today. Okay, Ro and thank
you for for the